# mobilome_2022
Plasmid-encoded genes facilitate the spread of antimicrobial resistance (AMR) though horizontal gene transfer (HGT) and the protein-level effects of this remain unclear. HGT driven by plasmids enables the diversification of pathogens into new anatomical and environmental niches, implying that plasmid-bourne genes can cooperate well with chromosomal genes. It is hypothesised that such mobile genes are functionally different to chromosomal ones due to this ability to encode non-essential functions like AMR and traverse distinct host cells. The extent to which these distinct groups interact with one another at the protein level remains unclear. Here, we examine the incidence and protein-protein interactions of all known plasmid-linked genes (n=9,172) across representative specimens from all bacteria (n=4,419). We find that such mobile genes constitute 10.5% of the total number of genes in bacteria, and show that plasmid genes preferentially associated with different species, and provide moderate taxonomical power. Surprisingly, plasmid-linked proteins had more interactions than chromosomal ones, though topological analysis showed that the plasmid-related proteins had limited overall impact on the PPI network structure for 94% of bacterial samples. Plasmid-related proteins had both more direct and indirect protein-protein interactions, which counters the assertion that genes with high transfer rates should have fewer interactions. This paper assembles extensive data on plasmid-related proteins, their interactions and associations with diverse bacterial specimens that is available for the community to explore in more detail.
